doc/indexing-c.adoc, before:

= Indexing Janet's C Source Code
:toc:

== Background

After making attempts to index Janet's C source code using https://github.com/universal-ctags/ctags[Universal Ctags] and https://github.com/tree-sitter/tree-sitter[tree-sitter], it became clear that neither approach was likely to yield good returns for a reasonable amount of effort.  Note that for some other C code bases, one of those approaches may be good enough, but if accuracy is desired with minimal work, I don't recommend either for Janet's C source.

What seems to be a better alternative is to use https://github.com/MaskRay/ccls[`ccls`], a C https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/[LSP] server.  (There is also https://clangd.llvm.org/[`clangd`], but I have not tried it out as much.  Depending on your environment, it may be that clangd is a better fit (e.g. for Windows, building clangd can be avoided, but ATM not so with ccls).)

What follows are some instructions in arriving at minimal setups for using ccls with Neovim, Emacs, or Kakoune.  There are also links for VSCode info.

== Setup of ccls (C LSP Server) for use with Janet

1. Install https://github.com/MaskRay/ccls[ccls] and make sure it's available via `PATH`.  It may not be necessary to build from source -- see https://github.com/MaskRay/ccls/wiki/Build#system-specific-notes[here] for possible packages.

2. Install https://github.com/rizsotto/Bear[bear] (used for creating `compile_commands.json` which ccls needs).  This too might have https://repology.org/project/bear/versions[a package] already.  (If you use `meson` to build Janet, it may be possible to skip the `bear` installation and use in the following steps.  https://github.com/MaskRay/ccls/wiki/Project-Setup#meson[`meson build` yields a `compile_commands.json`] in the `build` subdirectory, so making a symlink to it from Janet's project root directory may be one way to get things working.)


3. Get https://github.com/janet-lang/janet[Janet]'s source:
+
----
git clone https://github.com/janet-lang/janet
----

4. Create https://clang.llvm.org/docs/JSONCompilationDatabase.html[`compile_commands.json`] for ccls by building Janet's source while letting `bear` "snoop":
+
----
cd janet
# remove / modify following as desired
export PREFIX=$HOME/.local
bear -- make
----

At this point the ground has been prepared for working via various editors.  (Manually running `ccls` in Janet's project directory will index the source, yielding a `.ccls-cache` directory, but this step may be performed automatically via one's editor and thus may be unnecessary.)

## Editor Configuration

ATM, instructions are for Neovim, Emacs, and Kakoune, but https://github.com/MaskRay/ccls/wiki/Editor-Configuration[using other editors is also possible], for example, https://github.com/MaskRay/ccls/wiki/Visual-Studio-Code[VSCode].

### Neovim

Apparently, there are https://github.com/MaskRay/ccls/wiki/Editor-Configuration[numerous options], but here just one will be described.

1. Prepare to install https://github.com/neovim/nvim-lspconfig[`nvim-lspconfig`], e.g. if using vim-plug add the following to `~/.config/nvim/init.vim` or other appropriate location:
+
----
Plug 'neovim/nvim-lspconfig'
----

2. Also add:
+
----
lua <<EOF
require('lspconfig').ccls.setup{}
EOF
----

3. Install the plugin in Neovim via: `:PlugUpdate`

4. Open a Janet C source file (e.g. `src/core/vm.c`).

5. Verify the LSP connection via `:LspInfo`.

6. Put the cursor somewhere in a Janet-specific identifier and try: `:lua vim.lsp.buf.definition()`


7. See https://neovim.io/doc/user/lsp.html[`:help lsp`] and/or https://github.com/neovim/nvim-lspconfig#Keybindings-and-completion[the Keybindings and completion section of nvim-lspconfig's README] for more details.

### Emacs

Below are two ways to set up Emacs.

#### eglot

1. Install https://github.com/joaotavora/eglot[eglot] and configure your `.emacs`-equivalent.  Below is a https://github.com/raxod502/straight.el[`straight.el`]-based approach.
+
----
;;; eglot
(straight-use-package
  '(eglot :host github
          :repo "joaotavora/eglot"
          :file ("*.el")))

(use-package eglot
  :straight t)
----

2. Start Emacs and open some Janet C source file (e.g. `src/core/vm.c`).

3. `M-x eglot` to start ccls and connect to it.

4. Try `M-.` on a Janet-specific identifier to test jump-to-definition.

5. See the https://github.com/joaotavora/eglot#1-2-3[1-2-3 section of eglot's README] and https://github.com/MaskRay/ccls/wiki/eglot[the eglot Wiki page at the ccls repository] for more details.

#### lsp-mode and emacs-ccls

1. Install https://github.com/emacs-lsp/lsp-mode[lsp-mode] and https://github.com/MaskRay/emacs-ccls[emacs-ccls] and configure your `.emacs`-equivalent.  Below is a https://github.com/raxod502/straight.el[`straight.el`]-based approach.
+
----
;;; lsp-mode
(straight-use-package
 '(lsp-mode :host github
            :repo "emacs-lsp/lsp-mode"
            :file ("*.el" "clients" "docs" "features" "refcard" "scripts")))

(use-package lsp-mode
  :straight t
  :init
  ;; set prefix for lsp-command-keymap
  (setq lsp-keymap-prefix "C-c l")
  :commands lsp)

;;; emacs-ccls
(straight-use-package
 '(ccls :host github
        :repo "MaskRay/emacs-ccls"
        :file ("*.el")))

(use-package ccls
  :straight t)
----

2. Start Emacs and open some Janet C source file (e.g. `src/core/vm.c`).

3. `M-x lsp` to start ccls and connect to it.

4. Try `M-.` on a Janet-specific identifier to test jump-to-definition.

5. See https://emacs-lsp.github.io/lsp-mode/page/installation/[Installation info for LSP Mode] and https://github.com/MaskRay/ccls/wiki/lsp-mode[the lsp mode Wiki page at the ccls repository] for more details.

### Kakoune

1. Install https://github.com/kak-lsp/kak-lsp#installation[kak-lsp], and copy `kak-lsp.toml` to the directory `~/.config/kak-lsp/`.

2. Edit `~/.config/kak-lsp/kak-lsp.toml` so it has at least:
+
----
[language.c_cpp]
filetypes = ["c", "cpp"]
roots = ["compile_commands.json", ".ccls", ".git"]
command = "ccls"
args = ["--init={\"completion\":{\"detailedLabel\":false}}"]
----

3. Edit `kakrc` to contain at least:
+
----
eval %sh{kak-lsp --kakoune -s $kak_session}
hook global WinSetOption filetype=(c|cpp) %{
    lsp-enable-window
}

map global user l %{: enter-user-mode lsp<ret>} -docstring "LSP mode"
----

4. Start Kakoune and open some Janet C source file (e.g. `src/core/vm.c`).

5. Try `,ld` on a Janet-specific identifier to test jump-to-definition.

6. See the https://github.com/MaskRay/ccls/wiki/Kakoune[Kakoune page of the ccls wiki], the https://github.com/kak-lsp/kak-lsp/wiki/How-to-install-servers#c-c[C, C++ portion of the "How to install servers" page of the kak-lsp wiki], and/or https://discuss.kakoune.com/t/kak-lsp-ccls/750[MaskRay's post to Kakoune Community Hub] for more details.

Commit message:

Add tip about `compile-commands` Makefile target

doc/indexing-c.adoc, after:

= Indexing Janet's C Source Code
:toc:

== Background

After making attempts to index Janet's C source code using https://github.com/universal-ctags/ctags[Universal Ctags] and https://github.com/tree-sitter/tree-sitter[tree-sitter], it became clear that neither approach was likely to yield good returns for a reasonable amount of effort.  Note that for some other C code bases, one of those approaches may be good enough, but if accuracy is desired with minimal work, I don't recommend either for Janet's C source.

What seems to be a better alternative is to use https://github.com/MaskRay/ccls[`ccls`], a C https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/[LSP] server.  (There is also https://clangd.llvm.org/[`clangd`], but I have not tried it out as much.  Depending on your environment, it may be that clangd is a better fit (e.g. for Windows, building clangd can be avoided, but ATM not so with ccls).)

What follows are some instructions in arriving at minimal setups for using ccls with Neovim, Emacs, or Kakoune.  There are also links for VSCode info.

== Setup of ccls (C LSP Server) for use with Janet

1. Install https://github.com/MaskRay/ccls[ccls] and make sure it's available via `PATH`.  It may not be necessary to build from source -- see https://github.com/MaskRay/ccls/wiki/Build#system-specific-notes[here] for possible packages.

2. Install https://github.com/rizsotto/Bear[bear] (used for creating `compile_commands.json` which ccls needs).  This too might have https://repology.org/project/bear/versions[a package] already.  (If you use `meson` to build Janet, it may be possible to skip the `bear` installation and use in the following steps.  https://github.com/MaskRay/ccls/wiki/Project-Setup#meson[`meson build` yields a `compile_commands.json`] in the `build` subdirectory, so making a symlink to it from Janet's project root directory may be one way to get things working.)


3. Get https://github.com/janet-lang/janet[Janet]'s source:
+
----
git clone https://github.com/janet-lang/janet
----

4. Create https://clang.llvm.org/docs/JSONCompilationDatabase.html[`compile_commands.json`] for ccls by building Janet's source while letting `bear` "snoop":
+
----
cd janet
# remove / modify following as desired
export PREFIX=$HOME/.local
bear -- make
----

An alternative way to end up with `compile_commands.json` is to use [the Makefile target `compile-commands` in janet's Makefile](https://github.com/janet-lang/janet/blob/40ae2e812ff5e186ba578d441de9f3d2bebd93fb/Makefile#L322-L324).  Note that this may require installation of [`compiledb`](https://pypi.org/project/compiledb/).

At this point the ground has been prepared for working via various editors.  (Manually running `ccls` in Janet's project directory will index the source, yielding a `.ccls-cache` directory, but this step may be performed automatically via one's editor and thus may be unnecessary.)

## Editor Configuration

ATM, instructions are for Neovim, Emacs, and Kakoune, but https://github.com/MaskRay/ccls/wiki/Editor-Configuration[using other editors is also possible], for example, https://github.com/MaskRay/ccls/wiki/Visual-Studio-Code[VSCode].

### Neovim

Apparently, there are https://github.com/MaskRay/ccls/wiki/Editor-Configuration[numerous options], but here just one will be described.

1. Prepare to install https://github.com/neovim/nvim-lspconfig[`nvim-lspconfig`], e.g. if using vim-plug add the following to `~/.config/nvim/init.vim` or other appropriate location:
+
----
Plug 'neovim/nvim-lspconfig'
----

2. Also add:
+
----
lua <<EOF
require('lspconfig').ccls.setup{}
EOF
----

3. Install the plugin in Neovim via: `:PlugUpdate`

4. Open a Janet C source file (e.g. `src/core/vm.c`).

5. Verify the LSP connection via `:LspInfo`.

6. Put the cursor somewhere in a Janet-specific identifier and try: `:lua vim.lsp.buf.definition()`


7. See https://neovim.io/doc/user/lsp.html[`:help lsp`] and/or https://github.com/neovim/nvim-lspconfig#Keybindings-and-completion[the Keybindings and completion section of nvim-lspconfig's README] for more details.

### Emacs

Below are two ways to set up Emacs.

#### eglot

1. Install https://github.com/joaotavora/eglot[eglot] and configure your `.emacs`-equivalent.  Below is a https://github.com/raxod502/straight.el[`straight.el`]-based approach.
+
----
;;; eglot
(straight-use-package
  '(eglot :host github
          :repo "joaotavora/eglot"
          :file ("*.el")))

(use-package eglot
  :straight t)
----

2. Start Emacs and open some Janet C source file (e.g. `src/core/vm.c`).

3. `M-x eglot` to start ccls and connect to it.

4. Try `M-.` on a Janet-specific identifier to test jump-to-definition.

5. See the https://github.com/joaotavora/eglot#1-2-3[1-2-3 section of eglot's README] and https://github.com/MaskRay/ccls/wiki/eglot[the eglot Wiki page at the ccls repository] for more details.

#### lsp-mode and emacs-ccls

1. Install https://github.com/emacs-lsp/lsp-mode[lsp-mode] and https://github.com/MaskRay/emacs-ccls[emacs-ccls] and configure your `.emacs`-equivalent.  Below is a https://github.com/raxod502/straight.el[`straight.el`]-based approach.
+
----
;;; lsp-mode
(straight-use-package
 '(lsp-mode :host github
            :repo "emacs-lsp/lsp-mode"
            :file ("*.el" "clients" "docs" "features" "refcard" "scripts")))

(use-package lsp-mode
  :straight t
  :init
  ;; set prefix for lsp-command-keymap
  (setq lsp-keymap-prefix "C-c l")
  :commands lsp)

;;; emacs-ccls
(straight-use-package
 '(ccls :host github
        :repo "MaskRay/emacs-ccls"
        :file ("*.el")))

(use-package ccls
  :straight t)
----

2. Start Emacs and open some Janet C source file (e.g. `src/core/vm.c`).

3. `M-x lsp` to start ccls and connect to it.

4. Try `M-.` on a Janet-specific identifier to test jump-to-definition.

5. See https://emacs-lsp.github.io/lsp-mode/page/installation/[Installation info for LSP Mode] and https://github.com/MaskRay/ccls/wiki/lsp-mode[the lsp mode Wiki page at the ccls repository] for more details.

### Kakoune

1. Install https://github.com/kak-lsp/kak-lsp#installation[kak-lsp], and copy `kak-lsp.toml` to the directory `~/.config/kak-lsp/`.

2. Edit `~/.config/kak-lsp/kak-lsp.toml` so it has at least:
+
----
[language.c_cpp]
filetypes = ["c", "cpp"]
roots = ["compile_commands.json", ".ccls", ".git"]
command = "ccls"
args = ["--init={\"completion\":{\"detailedLabel\":false}}"]
----

3. Edit `kakrc` to contain at least:
+
----
eval %sh{kak-lsp --kakoune -s $kak_session}
hook global WinSetOption filetype=(c|cpp) %{
    lsp-enable-window
}

map global user l %{: enter-user-mode lsp<ret>} -docstring "LSP mode"
----

4. Start Kakoune and open some Janet C source file (e.g. `src/core/vm.c`).

5. Try `,ld` on a Janet-specific identifier to test jump-to-definition.

6. See the https://github.com/MaskRay/ccls/wiki/Kakoune[Kakoune page of the ccls wiki], the https://github.com/kak-lsp/kak-lsp/wiki/How-to-install-servers#c-c[C, C++ portion of the "How to install servers" page of the kak-lsp wiki], and/or https://discuss.kakoune.com/t/kak-lsp-ccls/750[MaskRay's post to Kakoune Community Hub] for more details.
